[Doc] migration guide joda (#51986)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/migration/migrate_7_0/migrate_to_java_time.asciidoc

[[migrate_to_java_time]]

> === Java Time Migration Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Java time migration guide
```

> Since version 7.0 Elasticsearch is using java.time as an underlying implementation of dates parsing, formatting and calculations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since 7.0, {es} uses `java.time` as an underlying implementation of dates parsing, formatting and calculations.
```

java.time is in many aspects very similar to joda-time which we previously used. However there are some differences and this guide is meant to

> help you to become compatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With 7.0, {es} switch to java time from joda time for date-related parsing,
formatting, and calculations. This guide helps you identify whether this change
impacts you and how to prepare for the upgrade.
```

> ==== Identifying if you are affected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Impacted features
```

> You are only affected if you have used any custom date formats in your mappings, pipelines or templates.

Reviewer: The switch to java time only impacts custom date formats in the following features:

* <<mapping,Index mappings>>
* <<indices-templates,Index templates>>
* <<pipeline,Ingest pipelines>>

If you don't use custom date formats, you can skip the rest of this guide.

Most of the custom date formats are compatible, but with some there is a change of meaning or missing. More on that below.
A custom format is specified on a date field like this:
[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT my_index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "date": {
        "type":   "date",
        "format": "YYYY/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||YYYY/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
      }
    }
  }
}

> --------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: I think we can remove this section entirely.

Author: will remove

> To make sure if any of the date formats is deprecated run deprecation API or kibana upgrade assistant.

Reviewer: To see if your date format is impacted, use the <<migration-api-deprecation,deprecation info API>>
or the {kibana-ref}/upgrade-assistant.html[Kibana upgrade assistant]

//todo fix this
xx migration-api-deprecation xx
xxinclude ::../apis/deprecation.asciidoc

Sample output of deprecation api will be as follows:
[source,text]
--------------------------------------------------
This index has date fields with deprecated formats: [[type: doc, field: param2, format: yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy/MM/dd||epoch_millis, suggestion: 'y' year should be replaced with 'u'. Use 'y' for year-of-era.]]. Prefix your date format with '8' to use the new specifier.
--------------------------------------------------

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is needed. I'd remove it.

==== Incompatible formats

> If a pattern contains literals below, that means the pattern is incompatible and needs to be changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following date literals differ between java time and joda time. Custom date
formats containing these literals should be changed before upgrading.
```

> ===== Y - in 6.8 meaning Year of era. It should be replaced to y in 7.0 This is a big change because in 7.0 'Y' means week-based-year.

Reviewer: Rather than using headings `=====`, I'd create a definition list with each literal:

`Y` (Year of era)::
Replace with `y`. In java time, `Y` is used for week-based year (e.g. `2020W52`).

+
Example:
`YYYY-MM-dd` should become `yyyy-MM-dd`

Author: good idea - fixed

All of the examples above should be tested with real data. It is likely that you do not need the flexibility joda was giving.
If you expected your timezone to only be in `+01:00` form (XXX in java, ZZ in joda),
then there is no need to create a new java pattern with so many alternatives.

Consider using this date debugging site for assistance https://esddd.herokuapp.com/

==== Migrating affected mappings
Once an index is created with a mapping, it cannot change already existing fields. You need to create a new index with updated mapping
and reindex your data to it.
You can however update your pipelines or templates. Remember to look for templates you use with tools outside ES.
If you specified a custom date format there, then you need to update it too.

===== Example migration procedure
Let's assume that you have an index with a date field and custom format
////
[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT my_index_1
{
    "mappings" : {
      "properties" : {
         "datetime": {
           "type": "date",
           "format": "yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
         }
      }
    }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
////
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET my_index_1/_mapping
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> [source,js]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,console-result]
```

--------------------------------------------------
{
  "my_index_1" : {
    "mappings" : {
      "properties" : {
         "datetime": {
           "type": "date",
           "format": "yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
         }
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> // NOTCONSOLE

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> * Create my_index_2 with mappings changed with the format set to 8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create my_index_2 with mappings changed with the format set to `8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis`
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT my_index_2
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "datetime": {
        "type": "date",
        "format": "8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

* Reindex the deprecated format index to new_index_1

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST _reindex
{
  "source": {
    "index": "my_index_1"
  },
  "dest": {
    "index": "my_index_2"
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

* If you were using aliases, update them to a new index

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_aliases
{
    "actions" : [
        { "remove" : { "index" : "my_index_1", "alias" : "my_index" } },
        { "add" : { "index" : "my_index_2", "alias" : "my_index" } }
    ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

===== Update before upgrading to ES7.

> * update pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Just update the already existing one.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT _ingest/pipeline/mypipeline
{
  "description": "Pipeline for routing data to specific index",
  "processors": [
    {
      "date": {
        "field": "createdTime",
        "formats": [
         "8uuuu-w"
        ]
      },
      "date_index_name": {
        "field": "@timestamp",
        "date_rounding": "d",
        "index_name_prefix": "x-",
        "index_name_format": "8uuuu-w"
      }
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

* upgrade template
If your template was using joda date pattern it also should be updated before upgrading to ES7.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT _template/template_1
{
  "index_patterns": [
    "te*",
    "bar*"
  ],
  "settings": {
    "number_of_shards": 1
  },
  "mappings": {
    "_source": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "properties": {
      "host_name": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "created_at": {
        "type": "date",
        "format": "8EEE MMM dd HH:mm:ss Z yyyy"
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> ////

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> [[migrate_to_java_time]]

Reviewer: As this will be used to create a URL, we try to use hyphens.

```suggestion
[[migrate-to-java-time]]
```

=== Java time migration guide

> With 7.0, {es} switch to java time from joda time for date-related parsing,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With 7.0, {es} switched to java time from joda time for date-related parsing,
```

> With 7.0, {es} switch to java time from joda time for date-related parsing,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With 7.0, {es} switched from joda time to java time for date-related parsing,
```

formatting, and calculations. This guide is designed to help you determine
if your cluster is impacted and, if so, prepare for the upgrade.

> Joda style indices are supported in 6.8, but indices created with joda-style patterns in 6.x are also allowed to be used in 7.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Joda-style indices are supported in 6.8. Indices created with joda-style patterns in 6.x are also supported. in 7.0
```

All new indices created in 7.x are expected to be using java-time patterns.

> We advice to prepare for this migration in 6.8, but it will also work if you decide to perform it in version 7.x

Reviewer: While you can update any existing joda-time patterns in 7.x, we recommend you make these change 6.8 if possible.

- In 6.8 you need to prefix your new java.style pattern with `8`. Patterns without `8` are considered joda style.
- In 7.x patterns without `8` on indices *created in 6.x* are considered joda-style.

> - Patterns with or without `8` on indices *created in 7.x*  are considered java.style

Reviewer: I would add this as a new section. If possible, move it below the "Impacted features" section.

```suggestion
[[prefix-java-time-date-formats]]
=== Prefix for java-time date formats

To upgrade to 7.0, you'll need to convert any impacted joda-time date patterns
to their java-time equivalents.

To aid this migration, you can prefix java-time date patterns with an `8` prefix
in {es} 6.8 and later versions.

For example, you can change the date format `YYYY-MM-dd` to `8YYYY-MM-dd` to
indicate the date format uses java-time.

How {es} handles date formats using the `8` prefix depends on the version:

*6.8*: Date formats with an `8` prefix are handled as java-time formats. Date
formats without an `8` prefix are handled as joda-time formats. We recommend
converting these joda-time formats to java-time _before_ upgrading to 7.x.

*7.x*: For indices created in 6.x, date formats without an `8` prefix are
handled as joda-time formats. For indices created in 7.x, all date formats are
considered java-style, regardless of an `8` prefix.
```

> ==== Impacted features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migration-impacted-features]]
==== Impacted features
```

The switch to java time only impacts custom <<date,`date`>> and
<<date_nanos,`date_nanos`>> formats.

These formats are commonly used in:

* <<mapping,Index mappings>>
* <<indices-templates,Index templates>>
* <<pipeline,Ingest pipelines>>

If you don't use custom date formats, you can skip the rest of this guide.

> Most of the custom date formats are compatible, but with some there is a change of meaning or missing. More on that below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most custom date formats are compatible. However, several require
a conversion or change.
```

To see if your date format is impacted, use the <<migration-api-deprecation,deprecation info API>>
or the {kibana-ref}/upgrade-assistant.html[Kibana upgrade assistant]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[incompatible-date-formats]]
```

> ==== Incompatible formats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Incompatible date formats
```

> Custom date formats containing the following joda time literals should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom date formats containing the following joda-time literals should be
```

changed before upgrading.

> `Y` (Year of era)::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Y` (Year-of-era)::
```

+
--
Replace with `y`.

*Example:*

> `YYYY-MM-dd` should become `yyyy-MM-dd`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`YYYY-MM-dd` should become `yyyy-MM-dd`.
```

In java time, `Y` is used for

> https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/temporal/WeekFields.html[week-based year].

Reviewer: On second thought, I don't think this link is needed. The following paragraph explains the difference pretty well.
```suggestion
In java time, `Y` is used for week-based year.
```

Using `Y` in place of `y` could result in off-by-one errors in year calculation.

> The difference between year-of-era and week based year

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference between year-of-era and week-based year
```

For pattern `YYYY-ww` and date `2019-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`  will give `2019-01`

> For pattern `YYYY-ww` and date `2018-12-31T00:00:00.000Z`  will give `2019-01` (counter intuitive) because there is >4 days of that week in 2019

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, using the `YYYY-ww` format, `2019-01-01T00:00:00.000Z` is formatted
as `2019-01`. However, `2018-12-31T00:00:00.000Z` is also formatted as `2019-01`
despite being in 2018. This is because there are more than four days of that
week fall in 2019.
```

--

> `y` year::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`y` (year)::
```

+
--
Replace with `u`.

*Example:*

> `yyyy-MM-dd` should become `uuuu-MM-dd`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`yyyy-MM-dd` should become `uuuu-MM-dd`.
```

> The difference is that year can contain non positive values, whereas `y` can not. Also year-of-era can also be associated with an era field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In java time, `y` is used for year-of-era. `u` (year) can contain non-positive values, while `y` (year-of-era) cannot. `y` can also be associated with an era field.
```

--

> `C` century of era::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`C` (century of era)::
```

+
--
No longer supported in 7.0. There is no replacement, so you need to preprocess your input.

> A possible workaround https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38354151/how-to-force-java-time-localdate-to-assume-19th-century-as-yy-year-pattern

Reviewer: I don't think we need to include the stackoverflow link, but I'll defer to you if you feel strongly.

I think a tip on ways to preprocess your input (for example, using an ingest processor) would be great.
```suggestion
Century of era is not supported in java time or {es} 7.0.
There is no replacement. Instead, we recommend you preprocess your input.
```

Author: agree, it is not a 100% workaround so better to suggest a preprocessing. 
The scenario is very uncommon. I guess an example processor or pipeline would unnecessarily extend this guide. I will stick with your suggestion.

--

> `x` week year::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`x` (Week year)::
```

+
--

> Replace with `Y`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace with `Y`.
```

> This is a big change. `x` means https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[zone-offset] in java.time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In java time, `x` means https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[zone-offset]. 

[WARNING]
====
Failure to properly convert `x` (Week year) to `Y` could result in data loss.
====
```

--

> `Z` Zone offset/id::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Z` (Zone offset/id)::
```

+
--

> Replace with multiple `X`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace with multiple `X`'s.
```

> `Z` has similar meaning in 7.0 with a notable difference that it expects different number of literals to parse different forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Z` has similar meaning in java time. However, java time expects different
numbers of literals to parse different forms.
```

Consider migrating to `X` which give you more control of how your time is parsed.

> For instance format `YYYY-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssZZ` allowed all the forms below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider migrating to `X`, which gives you more control over how time is parsed.
For example, the format `YYYY-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssZZ` allows the following forms:
```

```
2010-01-01T01:02:03Z
2010-01-01T01:02:03+01
2010-01-01T01:02:03+01:02
2010-01-01T01:02:03+01:02:03
```

> You cannot parse them all with one pattern in 7.0. You need to specify 3 separate patterns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In java time, you cannot parse these all using a single date format
Instead, you need to specify 3 separate formats:
```

```
2010-01-01T01:02:03Z
2010-01-01T01:02:03+01
both parsed with yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssX

2010-01-01T01:02:03+01:02
yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssXXX

2010-01-01T01:02:03+01:02:03
yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssXXXXX
```

> If you expect all these combination to occur in your data you need to combine these patterns in 7.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you must accept all of these formats, you can specify each using a `||` delimiter:
```

[source,txt]
--------------------------------------------------
yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssX||yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssXXX||yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssXXXXX
--------------------------------------------------

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The same applies if you expect your pattern to occur without a colon:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same applies if you expect your pattern to occur without a colon (`:`):
```

> Pattern `YYYY-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssZ` accepting these dates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the `YYYY-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssZ` format accepts the following date forms:
```

```
2010-01-01T01:02:03Z
2010-01-01T01:02:03+01
2010-01-01T01:02:03+0102
2010-01-01T01:02:03+010203
```

> should be migrated to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To accept all these forms in java time, you must use the `||` delimiter:
```

[source,txt]
--------------------------------------------------
yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssX||yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssXX||yyyy-MM-dd'T'hh:mm:ssXXXX
--------------------------------------------------
--

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `d` day::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`d` (Day)::
```

+
--
The same meaning in 7.0 but is less flexible.

If your pattern was `YYYY-MM-dd` in 6.8 and you expect dates in form `2010-01-01` or `2010-01-1`
You need to provide an alternative pattern for all of these `yyyy-MM-dd||yyyy-MM-d`.
More then 2 digits are not allowed anymore. If you want to parse dates like `2010-01-00001` you need to create a pattern that expects a text literal `'000'` before `'d'`

> `yyyy-MM-'000'dd`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In java time, `d` is still interpreted as "day" but is less flexible.

For example, the joda-time date format accepts `2010-01-01` or `2010-01-1`.

In java time, you must use the `||` delimiter to provide an alternative format,
such as `yyyy-MM-dd||yyyy-MM-d`.

In java time, `d` does not accept more than 2 digits. To accept days with more
than two digits, you must include a text literal in your java-time date format.
For example, to parse `2010-01-00001`, you must use a java-time date format of
`yyyy-MM-'000'dd`.
```

--

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `e` name of day::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`e` (Name of day)::
```

+
--
The same meaning in 7.0. However it is less flexible in 7.0. It do not allow parsing short and full text forms.

If you used `EEE YYYY-MM` for a format and expected days in form:
`Wed 2020-01` or `Wednesday 2020-01`
then you have to use two combined patterns in 7.0
`cccc yyyy-MM||ccc yyyy-MM`

> E vs c. E means day-of-week vs c is for localized day-of-week. The difference is that E won't behave correctly for full text forms like Wednesday

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In java time, `e` is still interpreted as "name of day" but is less flexible.
In java time, `e` does not parse short- or full-text forms.

For example, the joda-time format `EEE YYYY-MM` accepts both
`Wed 2020-01` and `Wednesday 2020-01`.

To accept both of these dates in java-time, you must specify each format using
the `||` delimiter: `cccc yyyy-MM||ccc yyyy-MM`.

The joda-time literal `E` is interpreted as "day of week."
The java-time literal `c` is interpreted as "localized day of week."
`E` won't accept full-text day formats, such as `Wednesday`.
```

--

> Text forms EEEE and similar::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EEEE` and similar text forms::
```

+
--

> Full text forms are depending on locale data provided with JDK and the implementation details of java vs joda. You should test carefully before upgrading these patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for full-text forms depends on the locale data provided with the Java
Development Kit (JDK) you use and other implementation details. We recommend you
test formats containing these patterns carefully before upgrading.
```

--

> `z` time zone text::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`z` (Time zone text)::
```

+
--

> In 7.0 it will print 'Z' for Zulu given UTC timezone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In java time, `z` outputs 'Z' for Zulu, given a UTC timezone.
```

--

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migration-test]]
```

===== Test with your data
All of the examples above should be tested with real data. It is likely that you do not need the flexibility joda was giving.
If you expect your timezone to only be in one form - for instance `+01:00`  (XXX in java, ZZ in joda) -
then there is no need to create a new java pattern with so many alternatives.

> Consider using this date debugging site for assistance https://esddd.herokuapp.com/

Reviewer: If not sure we needed the middle sentences here. I removed them, but feel free to leave them in if you feel strongly.
```suggestion

We strongly recommend you test any date format changes using real data before
deploying in production.

For help with date debugging, consider using
https://esddd.herokuapp.com/[https://esddd.herokuapp.com/.]
```

> ==== Migrating affected mappings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migrate-updated-mappings]]
==== Migrating affected mappings
```

Once an index is created with a mapping, it cannot change already existing fields. You need to create a new index with updated mapping
and reindex your data to it.
You can however update your pipelines or templates. Remember to look for templates you use with tools outside ES.

> If you specified a custom date format there, then you need to update it too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

[TIP]
====
When updating custom date formats, ensure you also update any templates or tools
used _outside_ of {es}.
====

You can update custom date formats in existing ingest pipelines and index
templates.

However, you cannot directly update date formats used in existing index
mappings. To change date formats in mappings, you must create a new index with
an updated mapping and reindex your data to it.
```

Author: I applied the suggestion on the sentence about the need to create a new mapping.
I think it is worth mentioning pipelines and templates here. This is about the the ones within ES itself (not external)

> ===== Example migration procedure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migration-update-mapping-reindex]]
===== Update a mapping using a reindex
```

> ===== Example migration procedure

Reviewer: I don't think this heading is needed.
```suggestion
```

> Let's assume that you have an index with a date field and custom format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following index contains a mapping for the `datetime` field, a `date` field
with a custom date format. 
```

////
[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT my_index_1
{
    "mappings" : {
      "properties" : {
         "datetime": {
           "type": "date",
           "format": "yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
         }
      }
    }
}
--------------------------------------------------
////

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET my_index_1/_mapping
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "my_index_1" : {
    "mappings" : {
      "properties" : {
         "datetime": {
           "type": "date",
           "format": "yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
         }
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> * Create my_index_2 with mappings changed with the format set to `8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis`

Reviewer: To change the date format for the `datetime` field, create a separate index
containing an updated mapping and date format.

For example, the following `my_index_2` index changes the date format to `8uuuu/MM/dd
HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis`. The `8` prefix indicates this data format
use java time.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT my_index_2
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "datetime": {
        "type": "date",
        "format": "8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> * Reindex the deprecated format index to new_index_1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, reindex the data from `my_index_1` to `my_index_2`.
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST _reindex
{
  "source": {
    "index": "my_index_1"
  },
  "dest": {
    "index": "my_index_2"
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> * If you were using aliases, update them to a new index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using index aliases, update them to point to the new index.
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_aliases
{
    "actions" : [
        { "remove" : { "index" : "my_index_1", "alias" : "my_index" } },
        { "add" : { "index" : "my_index_2", "alias" : "my_index" } }
    ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> ===== Update before upgrading to ES7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migration-update-ingest-pipelines]]
===== Update ingest pipelines
```

If your pipelines were using a joda style patterns, they also have to be updated. There is no need to create a new pipeline.

> Just update the already existing one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your ingest pipelines contain joda-time date format, you can update them
using the <<put-pipeline-api,put ingest pipeline>> API.
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT _ingest/pipeline/mypipeline
{
  "description": "Pipeline for routing data to specific index",
  "processors": [
    {
      "date": {
        "field": "createdTime",
        "formats": [
         "8uuuu-w"
        ]
      },
      "date_index_name": {
        "field": "@timestamp",
        "date_rounding": "d",
        "index_name_prefix": "x-",
        "index_name_format": "8uuuu-w"
      }
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

* upgrade template

> If your template was using joda date pattern it also should be updated before upgrading to ES7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migration-update-index-templates]]
===== Update index templates

If your index templates contain joda-time date formats, you can update them
using the <<indices-templates,put index template>> API.
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT _template/template_1
{
  "index_patterns": [
    "te*",
    "bar*"
  ],
  "settings": {
    "number_of_shards": 1
  },
  "mappings": {
    "_source": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "properties": {
      "host_name": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "created_at": {
        "type": "date",
        "format": "8EEE MMM dd HH:mm:ss Z yyyy"
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
DELETE /_template/template_1
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> * Upgrade to 7.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
////
[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
DELETE /_template/template_1
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]
////
```

===== External templates

> Revisit other templates from elastic stack where you used a custom date pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[java-time-migration-update-external-tools-templates]]
===== Update external tools and templates
When updating custom date formats, ensure you also update any templates or tools
used _outside_ of {es}.

This can include tools such as {beats-ref}/getting-started.html[{beats}] or
{logstash-ref}/index.html[Logstash].
```

[[migrate-to-java-time]]
=== Java time migration guide

With 7.0, {es} switched from joda time to java time for date-related parsing,
formatting, and calculations. This guide is designed to help you determine
if your cluster is impacted and, if so, prepare for the upgrade.

> [[java-time-convert-date-formats]]

Reviewer: This is required. Otherwise, the doc splits pages here.
```suggestion
[discrete]
[[java-time-convert-date-formats]]
```

=== Convert date formats

To upgrade to 7.0, you'll need to convert any joda-time date formats
to their java-time equivalents.

To help track this effort, you can prefix java-time date formats with an `8`

> prefix in {es} 6.8 and later versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 in {es} 6.8 and later versions.
```

indicate the date format uses java time.

{es} treats date formats starting with the `8` prefix differently depending on
the version:

*6.8*: Date formats with an `8` prefix are handled as java-time formats. Date
formats without an `8` prefix are treated as joda-time formats. We recommend
converting these joda-time formats to java-time _before_ upgrading to 7.x.

*7.x and later*: For indices created in 6.x, date formats without an `8` prefix
are treated as joda-time formats. For indices created in 7.x and later versions,
all date formats are treated as java-time formats, regardless of whether it
starts with an `8` prefix.

[[java-time-migration-impacted-features]]
==== Impacted features
The switch to java time only impacts custom <<date,`date`>> and
<<date_nanos,`date_nanos`>> formats.

These formats are commonly used in:

* <<mapping,Index mappings>>
* <<indices-templates,Index templates>>
* <<pipeline,Ingest pipelines>>

If you don't use custom date formats, you can skip the rest of this guide.
Most custom date formats are compatible. However, several require
an update.

To see if your date format is impacted, use the <<migration-api-deprecation,deprecation info API>>

> or the {kibana-ref}/upgrade-assistant.html[Kibana upgrade assistant]

Reviewer: Adds a missing period.
```suggestion
or the {kibana-ref}/upgrade-assistant.html[Kibana upgrade assistant].
```

[[java-time-migration-incompatible-date-formats]]
==== Incompatible date formats
Custom date formats containing the following joda-time literals should be
changed before upgrading.

`Y` (Year of era)::
+
--
Replace with `y`.

*Example:*
`YYYY-MM-dd` should become `yyyy-MM-dd`.

In java time, `Y` is used for
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/temporal/WeekFields.html[week-based year].
Using `Y` in place of `y` could result in off-by-one errors in year calculation.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For pattern `YYYY-ww` and date `2019-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`  will give `2019-01`

> For pattern `YYYY-ww` and date `2018-12-31T00:00:00.000Z`  will give `2019-01` (counter intuitive) because there is >4 days of that week in 2019

Reviewer: Probably need to rewrap this line as well.
```suggestion
For pattern `YYYY-ww` and date `2018-12-31T00:00:00.000Z`  will give `2019-01` (counter-intuitive) because there is >4 days of that week in 2019
```

--

`y` (Year)::
+
--
Replace with `u`.

*Example:*
`yyyy-MM-dd` should become `uuuu-MM-dd`.

In java time, `y` is used for year of era. `u` can contain non-positive

> values, while `y` cannot. `y` can also be associated with an era field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values while `y` cannot. `y` can also be associated with an era field.
```

--

`C` (Century of era)::
+
--
Century of era is not supported in java time.
There is no replacement. Instead, we recommend you preprocess your input.
--

`x` (Week year)::
+
--
Replace with `Y`.

In java time, `x` means https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[zone-offset]. 

[WARNING]
====
Failure to properly convert `x` (Week year) to `Y` could result in data loss.
====
--

`Z` (Zone offset/id)::
+
--
Replace with multiple `X`'s.

> `Z` has s similar meaning in java time. However, java time expects different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Z` has a similar meaning in java time. However, java time expects different
```

--------------------------------------------------

The joda-time literal `E` is interpreted as "day of week."
The java-time literal `c` is interpreted as "localized day of week."
`E` does not accept full-text day formats, such as `Wednesday`.
--

`EEEE` and similar text forms::
+
--
Support for full-text forms depends on the locale data provided with your Java
Development Kit (JDK) and other implementation details. We recommend you
test formats containing these patterns carefully before upgrading.
--

`z` (Time zone text)::
+
--
In java time, `z` outputs 'Z' for Zulu when given a UTC timezone.
--

[[java-time-migration-test]]
===== Test with your data

We strongly recommend you test any date format changes using real data before
deploying in production.

For help with date debugging, consider using
https://esddd.herokuapp.com/[https://esddd.herokuapp.com/.]

[[java-time-migrate-update-mappings]]
==== Update index mappings
To update joda-time date formats in index mappings, you must create a new index
with an updated mapping and reindex your data to it.
You can however update your pipelines or templates. Remember to look for templates you use with tools outside ES.

> If you specified a custom date format there, then you need to update it too.

Reviewer: I feel this is covered well later.
```suggestion
```

Author: removed the part of external templates

////

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET my_index_1/_mapping
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "my_index_1" : {
    "mappings" : {
      "properties" : {
         "datetime": {
           "type": "date",
           "format": "yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
         }
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

To change the date format for the `datetime` field, create a separate index
containing an updated mapping and date format.

For example, the following `my_index_2` index changes the `datetime` field's 
date format to `8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis`. The `8` prefix 
indicates this date format uses java time.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT my_index_2
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "datetime": {
        "type": "date",
        "format": "8uuuu/MM/dd HH:mm:ss||uuuu/MM/dd||epoch_millis"
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> Next, reindex the data from `my_index_1` to `my_index_2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, reindex the data from the old index to the new index.

The following <<docs-reindex,reindex>> API request reindexes data from
`my_index_1` to `my_index_2`.
```

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST _reindex
{
  "source": {
    "index": "my_index_1"
  },
  "dest": {
    "index": "my_index_2"
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

If you use index aliases, update them to point to the new index.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_aliases
{
    "actions" : [
        { "remove" : { "index" : "my_index_1", "alias" : "my_index" } },
        { "add" : { "index" : "my_index_2", "alias" : "my_index" } }
    ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

[[java-time-migration-update-ingest-pipelines]]
===== Update ingest pipelines
If your ingest pipelines contain joda-time date formats, you can update them
using the <<put-pipeline-api,put ingest pipeline>> API.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------

> PUT _ingest/pipeline/mypipeline

Reviewer: Not a biggie. Just for consistency.
```suggestion
PUT _ingest/pipeline/my_pipeline
```
